

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 183 PRINT_PAGE 184 =====
Appendix II
Vasubandhu's Viaptimatratasiddhi
Vim.'atika and Trim.#ika
(The text is based upon Sylvan Levi's edition.
Mystery seems to surround the first two paragraphs
of Vasubandhu's auto-commentary on the Vim satika
not only because they contain views that are incompatible
with Vasubandhu's interpretation of Yogacira but also are lost
in their original and reconstructed by Levi on the basis
of Chinese and Tibetan translations. For these reasons,
they are ignored in the present annotation.)
Vijiaptimktratisiddhi
Vimpsatikii-kaika
1. Vfiiaptim~tram evaitad asad arthdvabhdsanat,
yathd taimirikasyasat keia-candradi-darianam.
This is a mere concept, because it reflects a substantially non-
existent object, like the perception of hair and [double] moon on the
part of one afflicated with eye-disease.
The perception of hair floating in space and the perception of double
moon are here considered to be of one who is afflicted with eye-disease.
Such illusory perceptions are not uncommon, even though they have no
basis in ordinary experience. The possibility of having such illusory percep-
tions indicates the problems relating to one of our most important sources
173


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 184 PRINT_PAGE 185 =====
APPENDIX II
of knowledge. It is conditioned by various factors, and in this particular
case of illusory perception, the dominant factor is the eye-disease. Even if
one is not afflicted by such eye-disease, one of the most important factors
that determine sensory experience is human disposition. The Buddha, who
did not recognize the possibility of omniscience (sarvajiatva), was compelled
to assume the relevance of human dispositions in any act of perception. For
him, there is no other way in which human beings can deal with the sensory
input, the "big, blooming, buzzing confusion." In such a context, to assume
that an object can be known without any distortion, that it can be known
"as it is", is to claim too much. It is this over-claim of the metaphysical
realist that Vasubandhu criticizes as the "non-existent object" (asad-artha).
For Vasubandhu, this "non-existent object' is a "mere concept" (vjiiapti-
mdtramn). To label it as a mere concept is not to say it is absolutely false or
imagined. On the contrary, it is an experience that involves one's disposi-
tional tendencies and which is communicated through a concept. If this
concept were to be "reified," it would not be a "mere concept," but a concept
that would correspond exactly with the object that is independent (vyiqapty
antaram artham, see Vasubandhu's comments on Vimri 10 explained below).
For this reason, this singularly important term vzfiapti is here rendered as
"concept," contrary to the available understanding of it as "ideation" or
"consciousness." Vasubandhu, as the author of the Abhidharmakoia, has
already utilized this term and its negative form (avyiqaptz) to explain the
varieties of karma discussed in Buddhism (see Akb pp. 162, 235-236; also in
Ndgarjuna's Kdriki XVII. 4-5). In those contexts, it was used in the sense
of "intimation." However, where such "intimation" or "communication"
cannot be made, what is available is a pure fabrication, a nirmana. Thus,
according to the scholastics as reported by Vasubandhu, any state that is
beyond the first stage of meditation (prathama-dhyana) lacks any means of
communication (vfiiapti-samua/pdakdbhkva, Akb p. 427; Adv p. 401) and,
therefore, is literally indefinable. This is because they believed that after the
first stage of meditation all modes of discrimination and, therefore of con-
ceptualization are abandoned. These cannot be spoken of except through
fabrications (nirmita, Akb p. 427). Our analysis of the four preliminary
states of meditation (see "Analytic Yoga") leaves no room for such inef-
fability. Therefore, in the present context, when Vasubandhu maintains
that truth or reality is a "mere concept," he is not insisting that it is beyond
conceptualization or description. On the contrary, he is following the Bud-
dha's own explanation that there are no eternal truths (saccani . . . niccanl)
apart from sense experience (afiatra safifiqya, Sn 886) and which are com-
municated through concepts. As sense experience is dispositionally condi-
174


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 185 PRINT_PAGE 186 =====
VASUBANDHUS VIJNAPTIMA TRA TASIDDHI
tioned and, therefore, liable to change (sabbe sankhkrd anicca, Dh 277)
depending upon conditions, the concepts by means of which such ex-
perience is communicated could not be incorruptible nor can they represent
an object that is completely independent (see William James, Some Problems
of Philosophy, pp. 33-34; Principles of Psychology, 11.78-79).
A metaphysical realist will undoubtedly be shaken up by a statement like
Vasubandhu's. Therefore, he will raise questions that worry him most. In
the next verse, Vasubandhu anticipates such questions.
2. Yadi vfiiaptir anarthd noyamo deia-kdlayo#,
samtdnasydniyamai ca yukta krtya-kriya na ca.
If a concept were to be without a real object, neither the determina-
tion of space and time, nor the non-determination of the [percep-
tual] stream nor fruitful activity would be proper.
The denial of a "real object" represented by a concept throws the
metaphysical realist into a quandry. He cannot account for four events
which he has tried to justify on the basis of the existence of such a real ob-
ject. The first two are space and time. For a philosopher like Immanual
Kant, these were transcendental forms of sensation. For him, non-spatial
and non-temporal events are not known through sense experience.
Whether one can develop a non-sensuous "intutition" on the basis of which
such real objects can be known is an open question in Kant. At least for the
present moment, Vasubandhu is not ready to deal with that question.
The denial of a real object also deprives the metaphysical realist of any
means of explaining the problem of verification, for two different in-
dividuals would not be able to perceive the same object.
Worst of all, such a denial will leave any response to sensory stimuli, any
form of uniformity of behavior, without an explanation. Not only a life of
morality, but even the ordinary day-to-day life of fruitful activity would be
rendered meaningless.
The claims of the metaphysical realists like the Sarvastivadins were well
known to Vasubandhu, who wrote a treatise like the Abhidharmakoia long
before he embarked upon the present venture. Unlike the Vaigesikas, they
asserted that even though individual atoms (paramdnu) constituting an ob-
ject cannot be grasped, the collocation of atoms (paramdnu-samcaya) can be
175


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 186 PRINT_PAGE 187 =====
APPENDIX II
known and that when such harmony of atomic causes of elements
(dharmanam) exist, there comes to be the capacity for action (kriya-sdmarthya
= krtya-kriyd, see Adv. p. 277).
3. Deradi-noyamah siddhah svapnavat pretavat puna4,
samtdnani~yamah sarvaih piya-nady~di-dari'ane.
As in dreams, the determination of space, etc., is established. Fur-
thermore, as in the case of departed spirits, the non-determination
of the [perceptual] stream is established by the perception of the
stream of puss, etc., by all of them.
Vasabandhu seems to be least interested in discovering a special intuitive
faculty through which a "real object," whether it is eternal or not, could be
perceived. Instead of looking for any transcendence, he prefers to deal with
the problem of sense experience itself. If the determinations of space and
time are possible in dream experience even without the so-called "real ob-
ject," why it is necessary to posit such an object when one is called upon to
explain sense experience?
However, the problem of explaining similar perceptions of different in-
dividuals is not so easily resolved by utilizing dream experience. Therefore,
Vasubandhu resorts to the experience of the "departed spirits" (preta), not
with a view to establishing the reality of a "spirit world" existing unseen by
the ordinary means of cognition, but with the intention of laying bare the
over-claims of the metaphysical realists in asserting a "real object."
The Buddha's discourse on 'Pltala" (S 4.206-207), indeed, becomes very
relevant here. To the question as to whether there is a real "hell" beneath
the ocean where human beings are reborn as a result of leading immoral
lives, the Buddha responded by saying that such a "hell" is no more than the
"painful feelings" (dukkha vedand) one experiences. Whether it is heaven or
hell, it is within this fathom-long conscious body (S 1.62). It is what one
makes of one's life. And in that process one is guided by one's sensory ex-
periences that are determined on the basis of one's dispositions. To use the
terminology of a pragmatist, it is not a ready-made world; rather one that is
"being made" all the time.
176


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 187 PRINT_PAGE 188 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJNAPTIMATRA TASIDDHI
Thus, it is not impossible for human beings to encounter similar 'hellish"
experiences and these require no ultimately real objects. On the contrary,
they are produced by a variety of conditions among which the so-called 'real
object" may play a much less significant role than even human dispositions.
4. Svapnopaghdtavat krtya-kriya narakavat puna4,
sarvam narakapalAdi-dars'ane tais' ca badhane.
Fruitful activity is comparable to affliction in dreams. Again, all of
them are similar to experiences in hell involving the perception of
the guardians of hell as well as persecution by them.
Fruitful human activity is easily explained through a comparison with
dream experience. However, Vasubandhu is keen on continuing his ex-
planation based upon "hellish" experiences, especially because by these
means he could explain how such things as fear of punishment serve as
useful deterrents against immoral behavior. How the belief in a supreme
being as a dispenser ofjustice, even though not acceptable to Vasubandhu,
can be the cause of fruitful activity needs no explanation. What is being
emphasized by Vasubandhu is the fact that the positing of a 'real object" is
not a necessary condition for such activity.
5. Tiraicdm sambhavah svargeyathZ na narake taha,
na pretinrm yatas tafi'am duhkham nanubhavanti te.
The appearance of animals in heaven is not comparable to that of
the departed spirits in hell, for [some of them, like the guardians] do
not experience suffering produced in that context.
Before proceeding to question the "real existence" of even states such as
"hell" and the "world of spirits," Vasubandhu seems to be interested in ex-
plaining the difference between the guardians of hell and those undergoing
suffering in such states. The former, even though living in hell, do not
177


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 188 PRINT_PAGE 189 =====
APPENDIX II
undergo suffering in the same way as others do. This may be a rather insig-
nificant problem to be given such prominence in a rather concise treatist
like the Vims'atika. Yet, Vasubandhu's desire to explain this difference
reveals that he is as interested in the questions regarding moral responsi-
bility as he is with the problem of epistemology.
6. Yadi tat karmabhis tatra bhiitlnaim samrbhavas tathd,
igyate parinamasi ca kim vnijanasya nesyate.
If it were to be assumed that through their actions the appearance
and evolution of beings occur in that context [i.e., in hell], why is
it not assumed in the context of consciousness?
This represents Vasubandhu's reaction to the moral implications of the
atomistic theory of action which he himself espoused as a Sautrantika. Dur-
ing the time he was a Sautrantika, Vasubandhu spared no pains in explain-
ing how seeds of action could produce fruits (phala) in different states of ex-
istence (Akb p. 254). However, placing this doctrine of moral retribution in
the context of the theory of moments that was popular with the
Sautrantikas, Vasubandhu was compelled to devise various ingenious
methods to account for the continuity of the momentary stream of personal
existence (ibid., p. 250). Having realized the unsatisfactoriness of that ex-
planation which would not solve the metaphysical problem of 'difference,"
Vasubandhu is here raising the question as to why such fruits could not be
considered part of the stream of consciousness without being located in an
altogether different sphere. In other words, he is insisting that moral
responsibility be explained on the basis of the continuity in a life process
(samsdra) explicated in terms of dependence without breaking it up into
discrete segments and then looking for 'real objects" in order to account for
that continuity. His reference to the evolution of consciousness (vfiiana) is
significant, especially in the context in which the "identification" of a per-
sonality is considered. While the physical body is a necessary component in
such identification, it is not a sufficient condition. He was probably aware
that the Buddha himself recognized the importance of conscious life (vij-
fina) in explaining the process of "re-identification" (satdnusdri vififidnarm, D
3.134). This doctrine of re-identification was an important part of Vasu-
bandhu's explanation of action in his treatise called Karmasiddhiprakarana.
178


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 189 PRINT_PAGE 190 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJNAPTIMATRA TASIDDHI
7. Karmano vasananyatra phalam anyatra kalpyate,
tatraiva nesyateyatra visana kim, nu kiranianz.
The dispositional basis of action is conceived in one context and the
fruit in another. For what reason is it [the fruit] not assumed to be
in the same place as the seed?
rsana, though generally referred to a seed (bzja) is a dispositional
tendency (samskara) that dominates one's behavior (karma). Vasubandhu
who abandoned the metaphysics of the Sautrantikas is here insisting that
dispositions as well as their effects are manifested in a conscious personality
whose continuity through space and time is to be explained on the basis of
consciousness (vifiana). The Sautrantika metaphysics that emphasized dif-
ference involves an explanation that leaves the seed of action in one place
and the fruit or consequence in another. He seems to have realized that his
former credo was not very different from the view that the Buddha had re-
jected, namely, external causation (paramrkatamr) of action.
8. R-upady ayatandstitvam, tad vineyajanamn prati,
abhiprayavas'ad uktam upapiduka-sattvavat.
Considering the people who are to be disciplined, the existence of
spheres such as material form is spoken of for a very specific pur-
pose. It is comparable to the [reference to] beings of spontaneous
birth.
If it is consciousness itself that reflects spheres such as material form
(rupa) and that there are no such objects of perception, then the Buddha
could not have spoken of such spheres of existence. Vasubandhu rejects
such an argument (akdranam etat), insisting that the Buddha has spoken of
these for the benefit of those who are to be disciplined (vineya-jana).
However, before leaping in to the conclusion that this refers to the "skill-
in-means" (upfya-kauialya) on the part of the Buddha who would speak of
non-existent events as existent merely for pragmatic purposes, it would be
necessary to examine the metaphysical implications of the realist position
that militates against any discourse on discipline (vinaya).
179


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 190 PRINT_PAGE 191 =====
APPENDIX II
A metaphysical realist would recognize a persistent object having its own
substantial form (svabhava). For him, the perceiving stream of conscious-
ness (vjhana) is a mere passive tabula rasa on which the object leaves its
series of disconnected impressions. As such, that stream of consciousness
lacks not only any continuity, but also the capacity to change its course on
its own initiative. Discipline (vinaya) of a human being makes no sense in
such a context. Neither moral action nor moral responsibility can be ac-
counted for satisfactorily. A radical empiricist approach is required to cor-
rect this position. Indeed, this is what Vasubandhu is suggesting when he,
in his auto-commentary, explains "specific purpose (abhipriya)" as the inten-
tion of acknowledging the unbroken continuity (anucchedam) of the stream
(sam tati) in the future (ayatyoh- ). In other words, Vasubandhu seems to take
the object as an experience on the basis of which the continuity in con-
sciousness is established. The meaning of the word "object" is thus confined
to its practical results, not any metaphysical existence apart from ex-
perience. The recognition of continuity in consciousness based upon an ex-
perience of an object provides for an opportunity for moral progress as well
as responsibility.
Vasubandhu sees the best illustration of this sort of solution in the Bud-
dha's recognition of "beings of spontaneous birth" (upapaduka-sattva, Pali
opap~tika).
9. Yatah svabTi'gd vfijaptiryad dbhasd pravartate,
dvividhayatanatvena te tasyd munir abravit.
The sage has described how a concept, reflecting the twofold
spheres, proceeds from its own seed.
The reference here is to vfiiapti rather than vyfiina. Vfiiapti can mean that
by which a certain awareness of consciousness (vyiinna) is communicated;
hence a concept. In order to refute the claims of the metaphysical realist,
who assumes the object to have its own nature independently of the perceiv-
ing consciousness, Vasubandhu insists upon the concept of the twofold
spheres, namely, the visual organ and the visible object, as arising from its
own seed. This seed, as explained earlier, is none other than the disposi-
tions (vasand) (see Vimi 7). In the verse that follows, Vasubandhu considers
this explanation as a way of establishing or penetrating into the non-
substantiality of the human person (pudgala-nairdtmya). This fact is very
180


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 191 PRINT_PAGE 192 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJNAPTM1ATRA TASIDDHI
significant, for having rejected the realist conception of a self-existent ob-
ject, Vasubandhu wants to avoid positing consciousness (vjfidna) as an
ultimately real entity. In fact, he seems to understand the concept (vz4hiapth),
not simply as a projection of consciousness, as a metaphysical idealist would
assume, but rather as a product of the twofold spheres that are determined
by dispositions (vasana). This, in a way, is not too far removed from the ex-
planation provided by the Buddha. Only the terminology used is different.
In the case of the Buddha, however, the causal account of perception and,
therefore, of conception was intended to eliminate the belief in a meta-
physical self (diman). Vasubandhu, of course, has an additional problem to
deal with, namely, the view of the metaphysical realist. Hence, after
presenting a way of penetrating into the non-substantiality of the human
person, Vasubandhu immediately proceeds to reject the substantialist no-
tions of real elements (dharma).
10. Yatha pudgala-nairdtmya-pravedo hy anyatha punao,
desand dharma-nairdtmya-praveiah kalpitdtmand.
This, indeed, is the way of penetrating into the non-substantiality
of a person. However, the discourse on the penetration into the non-
substantiality of elements is different in elucidating self as being
imagined.
The manner in which the understanding of the non-substantiality of a
person (pudgala-nairatmya) is achieved is explained in the previous verse.
That involved the recognition of a concept generated by dispositions
without having to deny perceptual activity. The realization of the non-
substantiality of the elements is to be achieved through considering the self
(dtman) in phenomena as a mere imagination (parikalpita). The self (dtman)
referred to here is substance (svabhdva) admitted by the foolish people (bdla)
(Virnis 6). Vasubandhu's commentary provides ample information regard-
ing the nature of percepts and concepts that he is expounding. Through the
establishment of a "mere-concept" (vijriapti-mdtra), Vasubandhu perceives a
way of penetrating into the non-substantiality of all things (vzijraptimatra-
vyavasthapanaya sarva-dharmna nam nairatmya-pravesfo bhavati), and not by its an-
nulment (na tad apavad~t). Indeed, what is denied is a concept of an object
that stands independent or apart from a concept (vtiiqapty antaram arthah). On
the contrary, even while recognizing a plurality of concepts (hence the use
181


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 192 PRINT_PAGE 193 =====
APPENDIX II
of the plural term vfiiapitndm), Vasubandhu admits their meaningfulness
(arthavalttva).
Thus, Vasubandhu is compelled to look for a "middle standpoint" from
which a concept (v~iiaptz) can be understood. The Buddha's statement that
"spheres such as material form exists," needs to be salvaged from the meta-
physical interpretations, not only of the "soul-theorists" (atma-vidin), but
also of the substantialists (svabhava-vadin). The verses that follow are,
therefore, devoted to a critical analysis of the realist interpretation of the
nature of the object.
11. Na tad ekam na cdnekam visayah paramanuiah,
na ca te samhata yasmlt paramanur na sidhyati.
Atom-wise, an object is neither one nor many. Neither is it a con-
glomeration of them. For that reason, an atom is not established.
Before he became disillusioned with the Sautrantika (and SarvAstivada)
treatment of the object of perception, Vasubandhu was involved in an ex-
tensive study of the conception of atoms (paramnnu), for that was the very
basis of the explanations of perception in these two schools. His Abhidharma-
koiabhdsga abounds in speculations regarding the nature of atoms and how
they constitute an object (see Ak pp. 32-33). Indeed, the atoms were even
considered as the "ultimate reality" (paramdrtha) by some of these schools
(Akb p. 334). Vasubandhu's fascination with such speculation at that time
may have blinded him to the fact that it was not very different from the
philosophical enterprize of the Vaifesikas. Abandoning his Sautrantika
leanings, Vasubandhu now realizes the authorship of the theory of atoms.
Therefore, in the present treatise he specifically attributes the theory of
atoms to the Vaigesikas.
In this auto-commentary, Vasubandhu explains the implications of the
theory of atoms, as it emerged in the Vaigesika school. According to him,
the Vaigesikas believed that spheres like material form (rUpa), which holds
one-to-one correspondence with the concepts of material form, represent a
unity (eka) in terms of a molecule, i.e., an entity that consists of parts
(avayavTru-pa). However, in terms of atoms it is a plurality (aneka).
Vasubandhu argues that a whole is not perceived apart from its parts.
Even so, a molecule is nowhere perceived independent of its constituents.
182


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 193 PRINT_PAGE 194 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJNAPTIMA TRA TiSIDDHI
Similarly, the object is not a unity of atoms or parts. Neither is it a plural-
ity, for the atoms that go to constitute a molecule are also not perceived,
either as individual units (pratyeka) or as an aggregate (samhata).
12. Satkenayugapadyogat paramanoh sad-amsata,
,ajqam, samana-de'atv t pindak syad anu-mitrakah.
Because of the necessity ofjoining with six others, an atom will have
six facets. Since the six atoms occupy equal space, even the ag-
gregate would be a mere atom.
An atom, by definition, is without parts (niravayavai ca paramanavah, Akb
p. 32). If so, how one atom could join with other atoms to produce a
molecule, turned out to be a source of controversy among the different
teachers of the SarvAstivada and Sautrantika schools (ibid., pp. 32-33).
Compared with such varying views, Vasubandhu preferred a theory
presented by Vagumitra, who maintained that one atom does not touch
another, but that the idea of touching one another represents merely the
absence of any space between them (nirantare tu sprsta-samrjnieti, ibid., p. 33).
In that context, Vasubandhu was not abandoning the very conception of
atoms. He was simply favoring one theory over another. However, in the
present context, Vasubandhu is looking for arguments to abandon the
whole theory.
Vasubandhu's realization that as a Buddhist he could not argue for an
empirical foundation of a theory of atoms, as the Vaigesikas did, compelled
him to resort to rational arguments to deny its validity. Therefore, he
argues: When an atom has to combine with six others from six directions, it
has to possess six facets. For one atom cannot occupy the space of another.
However, if each atom were to occupy an identical space and, by defini-
tion an atom has no magnitude, then the aggregate itself would be a mere
atom. In fact, an aggregate would not be perceived if the parts are separate
from one another (paraspara-vyatirek~d).
13. Paramanor asaMiyoge tat samg te 'sti kasya sak,
na canavayavatvena tat sanZyogo na sidhyati.
183


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 194 PRINT_PAGE 195 =====
APPENDIX II
When the coalesence of an atom is not possible, whose coalesence
will there be at the time of aggregation. By not admitting the
absence of parts, the coalescence of an atom is not established.
Samghdta refers to the combination or aggregation of atoms, while
sarrzyoga implies coalesence. As mentioned earlier, for an atom to aggregate
with other atoms, it should possess at least six different facets or sides. This
means that it has parts, and such an assertion would go against the very
definition of an atom. To avoid this contradiction, the KRsmTra
Vaibhasikas insisted that atoms do not aggregate or do not touch one
another (na spriarti, Akb p. 32). If the atoms do not touch one another, then
there is no way in which they could coalese, for in the case of this latter pro-
cess, not only would they touch one another with parts, but will have to
mingle with another completely (sarvam Vtmana, ibid.). This is impossible if
the atoms were to have parts (avayavatva). Thus, aggregation and coalesence
involve two anti-nomial processes. Without parts there could be no ag-
gregation. With parts there cannot be coalesence. Yet, in order to coalese,
the atoms should come together and they cannot come together because, by
definition, they have no parts.
14. Dig-bhdga-bhedoyasyasti tasyaikatvam nayujyate,
chdyavrft kathamn vanyo na pi~nda.' cen na tasya te.
The unity of one that possesses spatial distinctions is not proper. [If
there were to be no spatial distinctions,] how can there be an
enveloping shadow? If an aggregate were to be different [from the
atoms], those charcteristics would not be part of it.
For Vasubandhu, the conception of unity and plurality are as
metaphysical as are the conceptions of atoms and aggregates to which they
are applied. In the context of a theory of atoms, unity would imply the
absence of any spatial distinctions such as front and back, lighted and shad-
ed segments, etc. If an aggregate were to be different from the atoms, the
characteristics that are not part of the atoms could not appear in the ag-
184


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 195 PRINT_PAGE 196 =====
VASUBANDHUS VIJRAPTIMiATRA TASIDDHI
gregate of which they are parts. The conceptions of unity and plurality are,
therefore, the same as the metaphysical ideas of identity and difference.
15. Ekatve na kramenzetiryugapan na grahdgrahau,
vicchinnaneka-vrttii ca sAismanaks ca lno bhavet.
When there is unity, there is no progressive movement nor simul-
taneous perception and non-perception. Neither is there inter-
rupted and diversified activity nor perception of subtle things.
The criticism presented here is based upon the assumption that unity is
the same as identity perceived in the form of substance (svabhdva). A few
centuries earlier, Nagarjuna had amply demonstrated the difficulties in-
volved in explaining movement (gati = eti) and change in the context of a
theory of substance. Vasubandhu is here reiterating the same arguments.
Candrakirti, who was explaining NAgArjuna's arguments, utilized the ex-
ample of a 'foot' (carana), considered as an aggregate of atoms
(paramanu-samghata), to illustrate the difficulties in explaining movement
(MKV p. 93).
Furthermore, Vasubandhu argues that the conception of a unitary
substance would create problems regarding the perception of an object. No
object is perceived in its entirety. Certain parts or facets are perceived and,
at the same time, certain other parts remain unperceived. Unity, implying
a substance, should make it possible to see all parts by seeing one part. The
front and back of an object could be seen at the same time, and this is em-
pirically impossible.
The same applies to interrupted and diversified activity. If the perceived
object consists of one unitary substance, it would be perceived in an iden-
tical form all the time. There cannot be variation in the perception even
though that perception may be interrupted due to other circumstances.
Finally, any process of discovery will be rendered meaningless, for very
often what is claimed to have been discovered is some subtle thing that has
escaped one's attention previously. Perception of such subtle differences
would not be possible if things continue as identities or substances.
185


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 196 PRINT_PAGE 197 =====
APPENDIX II
16. Pratyaksa-buddhih svapnddauyathZ sa cayaid tada,
na so 'rtho drsyate tasya pratyaksatvam kathamn matam.
Immediate knowledge is as in dream, etc. When that occurs, then
that object is not perceived. How, then, can immediacy be conceived.
This is an extremely important epistemological observation. There is no
doubt that human beings perceive and continue to perceive objects. How-
ever, at the time of perception of the object, there certainly is no awareness
that one is perceiving that object. When awareness arises that one is
perceiving an object, then at that very moment the object is no more
perceived. Vasubandhu is here making an extremely subtle epistemological
distinction between "perceiving an object" and 'being aware of the per-
ceiving of an object." For him, what is generally understood as immediate
perception (pratyakla) is the former, not the latter. Thus, by the time the
awareness of perception arises, the object perceived is already in the past
and is non-existent.
Vasubandhu's analysis of perception represents a veiled rejection of a
metaphysical cogito, i.e., one who is conscious of himself before an object is
perceived. It is a different way of expressing what Nagajuna intended to
say in Chapter III of his Kanrik. In any act of experience, one does not start
with the awareness of oneself (svam atmanam dars'anam, Kdrika III.2). Instead,
self-consciousness (vtiaina) is what emerges depending upon the sense
organ and the object of sense (cakkhuni ca paticca rfipe ca uppajjati
cakkhuvifiianam, M 1. 111). This causal account of perception, which can be
traced back to the Buddha himself and which is re-stated by Nagarjuna
(Kdriki III. 7; MKVp.r 118) is utilized by Vasubandhu who was keen on re-
jecting the naive realism of the Sarvastivadins that an object that impinges
on the senses can be perceived in its "real form" without distortions. Instead
of assuming that one can perceive a real object, Vasubandhu is emphasiz-
ing the variety of conditions that affects every act of perception. Dream ex-
perience (svapna) turns out to be a valuable means by which he could in-
culcate this idea.
17. Uktan yathd tad-abhasa vyFiapitih smaranarn tatah,
svapne drg-visayabhavam naprabuddho 'vagacchati.
186


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 197 PRINT_PAGE 198 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJRAPTIAaTRA TASIDDHI
As such, a concept is said to reflect that [experience]. Memory arises
therefrom. One who is not awakened does not realize the absence of
the object of perception in dream.
The immediate experience (pratyaksa), discussed in the previous verse,
receives further explanation here. There is no denial that such an im-
mediate experience occurs. The question is whether that experience reflects
a "real and substantial object" (sad-artha). Vasubandhu's answer seems to be
clearly in the negative. What then is that immediate experience? Is it a "big
blooming buzzing confusion?" Vasubandhu's auto-commentary seems to
confirm that this is the case. With the emergence of memory (smrty utpdat),
the experience of the object (arthanubhava) is interrupted and a 'mental con-
cept' (mano-vfitapti) arises, reflecting that experience but mixed up with
one's memory. It is this latter that is referred to as the 'thought of material
form, etc." (rupadivikalpika).
Thus, the object as "conceived" is not identical with the experience, even
though it has a basis in experience. This does not mean that Vasubandhu
was recognizing a 'pre-cognitive" or "pre-conceptual" reality, which is
beyond all forms of discrimination and description. He does not refer to it
as vfiiapti-mitra, for vyjfapti is the conceptualized. Such conceptualization
involving memory (smrtt) brings in many other elements such as the exer-
cise of thought (vikalpabhygsa) and dispositional tendencies (vdsana). The
"sensible muchness" receives its form through such exercise and tendencies.
These, however, are not comparable to the eternal and transcendental
categories recognized by Kant. They are as changeable and impermanent
as the flux of sensible muchness.
This is the same as the epistemological position adopted by the Buddha
when he explained dispositions (sahkhara) (see section on "The Buddha's
Conception of Personhood").
In other words, a "concept" is a substitute for a completed sensory pro-
cess, no part of which can be arbitrarily picked up and shown to be the
"ultimate reality." Without such a concept, no intellectual activity relating
to sense experience is at all possible. To awaken to this realization, which is
what is implied by prabuddha, does not mean the development of an
altogether different "intuition." It is a realization that in any act of cogni-
tion, we are involved in conceptualization based upon experience as well as
our dispositional tendencies, and that there is no "ultimate reality" or "sub-
stance" involved in such experience. This is the radical non-substantialist
position of the Buddha.
187


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 198 PRINT_PAGE 199 =====
APPENDIX II
18. Anyonyddhipatitvena vjiqapti-niyamo mitha,
middhenopahrtar cittam svapne tenisamam phalam.
The determination of mutually related concepts is based upon
mutual domination. In dream experience, thought is overwhelmed
by torpor. Hence the difference in fruit.
At this stage, Vasubandhu anticipates an objection from the realist. If
the evolution of the individual stream of consciousness (svasamrtna) in
terms of dispositional tendencies (vasand) were to dominate the concepts (vi-
jnapti) that are formed on the basis of sense experience (arthapratibhisa), and
not the objects themselves (na arthaviiesdt), how can the determination of
concepts take place as a result of contact with good or bad friends or the
hearing of the true or false doctrines? In other words, our conceptual think-
ing can be changed by our associations with good or bad people, with true
or false ideas. Such changes would be meaningless if concepts were to simp-
ly evolve out of our own stream of consciousness, rather than external ob-
jects.
Vasubandhu's treatment of concepts (vfiiapti) is not different from
Ndgarjuna's exposition of convention (samvrti, vyavahara or prajfiapti). For
the former, a concept is not a mere linguistic symbol. A concept is also a
convention based upon experience as well as dispositions (vOsana). These,
therefore, have fruits (phala) on the basis of which their goodness or
badness, reality or unreality is determined. The fruits of dream experience
are different from the fruits of waking experience, not merely because the
former has no external basis and the latter is founded on real external ob-
jects, but because of the degree to which the thought process is dominated
by torpor or sluggishness. In the waking state, the thought process, being
less sluggish, can be dominated by the "concepts" (vfiiapti) of others as well.
Hence the human response to varying conventions of the society in which
they live, as well as of the societies that they come to associate with.
Understanding Vasubandhu's notion of vfiiapti in this manner, one avoids
attributing any solipsism to him.
19. Maranamr para-vfiqapti-videsVd vikryd yatha,
smrti-1opddikdnyesm pis'acddi-manovaiat.
188


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 199 PRINT_PAGE 200 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJNAPTIMATRA TASIDDHI
Death is a transformation [of the personality] produced by a specific
concept of another. It is comparable to the loss of other's memory
through being overwhelmed by demonaic thoughts, etc.
A metaphyical realist believes that the material body has its own nature
(svabhava) and, as such, its termination occurs primarily on the basis of
material causes. He assumes that Vasubandhu's philosophy makes death or
termination of life (rnarana) meaningless. It is interesting to note that
Vasubandhu is not actually denying the phenomenon of death. Instead he
is emphasizing an aspect of the life-process (samsara) that the metaphysical
realist has completely ignored or cannot explain on the basis of his concep-
tion of self-nature. This is the influence of the concepts of others in bringing
about a person's death. Conventions of society often bring about the death,
not only of criminals, but also of large numbers of innocent people. Hitler's
conception of the purity of the Aryan race brought death to millions of
Jews. One word from a so-called spiritual leader can cause havoc on the
lives of millions of people.
Furthermore, for Vasubandhu, who was a faithful Buddhist, death in
this life is not the end of the life-process (sarmsdra). It is only a brief interrup-
tion, like the interruption of a person's memory through being possessed by
demonaic thoughts.
20. Kathamn va dandakaranya-iunyatvari rj1-kopata#,
mano-dando maha-vadya4 kathamn va tena sidhyati.
How can the devastation of the Dandaka forest resulting from the
anger of a sage be established. Or, how can it be established that
mental punishment is more blameworthy.
Whether the fire that devastated the Dandaka forest was generated by the
anger on the part of a sage, or whether he initiated the fire because of his
anger is not clear from the above statement. The ability to develop psycho-
kinetic powers (rddhi) is not discounted in Buddhism. Only its value as a
means of attaining spiritiual progress is abandoned.
The Buddha certainly recognized the overwhelming power of the human
mind, either in the perpetuation of evil or the promotion of good. Hence his
189


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 200 PRINT_PAGE 201 =====
APPENDIX LI
emphasis on the need to cleanse one's thought (citta-paroyodapana). Vasuban-
dhu is utilizing the Buddha's discourse to Upali, a disciple of Mahavira.
where the Buddha emphasized the importance attached to mental action
(mano-kamma, instead of mano-danda) in his teachings (M 1.371-387). Fur-
thermore, the Buddha's statement: "The world is led by thought" (cittena
noyyati loko, S 1.39) would make no sense if the mind were to be given a
secondary place in explaining human behavior. He would want to maintain
that even the substantialist theories, which can in the long run be destruc-
tive of human life as well as institutions, are the results of concepts.
21. Para-citta-vidam jiinam ayathartham katham yathl,
sva-citta-jilanam ajninadyathai buddhasya gocarah.
The knowledge of those who are telepathic is without a real object.
How? It is like the knowledge of one's own thought. It is due to ig-
norance. Such is the sphere of the enlightened one.
The present verse is often taken as evidence for the metaphysical
idealism of Vasubandhu, comparable to the Vedantic standpoint where the
subject-object discrimination is dissolved in a higher intuition. However, a
careful consideration of the terminology used by Vasubandhu may yield an
altogether different view. Vasubandhu is not denying telepathic
knowledge. He is merely rejecting the view that such knowledge reveals the
existence of a real object (yathartha), not a mere object (artha). Yathartha is
identical with sad-artha. The problem relates not only to telepathic
knowledge, but also to the knowledge of one's own thought. There is no
question that thoughts occur in a conscious human being. Vasubandhu has
already indicated how the so-called immediate experience vanishes into
thin air when reflection occurs (Virni 16). Similarly to assume the thinking
process of another (para-citta) is as metaphysically involved as the recogni-
tion of a cogito. What remains at the end of both processes is a "mere con-
cept" (vYiiapti-mztra), and this is the sphere of the enlightened one. It is, in-
deed, the knowledge that all phenomena (dharmah), including one's own
personal experience, are non-substantial (anatman).
190


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 201 PRINT_PAGE 202 =====
VASUBANDHU'S VIJRAPTIMATRA TASIDDHI
22. Viiqapti-matrata-siddhih sva-makti-sadrst maya,
krteyam sarvathd sd tu na cinyd buddha-gocarah.
The establishment of a "mere concept" has been achieved by me ac-
cording to my ability, even though it is unthinkable. It is, indeed,
the sphere of the enlightened one.
In his commentary, Vasubandhu characterizes the doctrine of "mere
concept" (viijptimntra) as one which involves a variety of relative determina-
tions (ananta-viniicaya-prabheda) and immeasurable profundity (agddha-
gambhirya), thus leaving room for some to assume transcendence of vjfiapti-
matrati. However, considering the statement closely, especially in the light
of some of the fundamental teachings of the Buddha as well as the manner
in which a disciple of the Buddha would pay reverence to the "true doctrine"
(sad-dharma), this statement can be explained in a totally different way.
The "middle path" (madhyama pratipat), proposed by the Buddha in his
discourse to Kaccayana was not one that would yield an absolutistic inter-
pretation. The theory of "dependent arising" (prafftyasamutpada) was, in-
deed, intended to avoid any notion of an absolute ultimate truth or reality.
If Vasubandhu's theory of "mere concept" (vfiqaptimntra) has any affinity to
the Buddha's middle way, it could not provide any basis for a "extreme
decision or determination" (anta-niicaya). Being fully cognisant of this
character of the Buddha's teaching, Vasubandhu is emphasizing not only
the relativity (ananta) but also the variety of contexts (prabheda) in which it
can be applied.
The statement that it is immeasurable in profundity (agadha-gambhriya)
can only be properly understood in the context in which Vasubandhu, as a
devoted disciple of the Buddha, places himself in relation to the Buddha.
The humility with which he treats his own explanation of the Buddha-word
and the respect with which he held the Buddha's own insight, is clearly im-
plied in his statements: "It is not possible for one like me to think of it with
its manifold implications," (sarva-prakdrd tu sa mddriaisi cintayitumr na iakyate,
p. 11).
It is the sphere of the enlightened ones (buddhdnam), because it is where
the distinction between the knowledge (Ainna) and the known (ftieya) are
completely destroyed. What is destroyed is not the discrimination between
the subject and object, but rather the relationship between knowlege and
191


===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 202 PRINT_PAGE 203 =====
APPENDIX II
the known. In other words, it is a complete rejection of the discrimination
that a metaphysical realist or a substantialist would make between knowl-
edge (U0 na) and the object of knowledge (jiieya). It is what Nagarjuna was
emphasizing when he wanted to establish the non-substantiality of elements
(dharma-nairatmya), namely, the appeasement of the object (drastavyopaiama,
Karika V.8). It is not intended as a justification for absolute idealism.
Vij iaptimitratksiddhi
Tritpzka-vijimpti-koriko
1. Atma-dharmopacgro hi vividhoya4 pravartate,
v~iiana-pariname 'sau parinamah sa ca tridha.
Whatever, indeed, is the variety of ideas of self and elements that
prevails, it occurs in the transformation of consciousness. Such
transformation is threefold, [namely,]
Upacdra is a usage or a prevailing idea. Self (ruman) was an idea that
predominated the Indian philosophical scene before the advent of the Bud-
dha. The notion of elements (dharma) possessing substance (svabhdva) is an
idea that came to prevail as a result of the speculations of the Sarvastivada
school of Buddhism. In their attempt to get rid of the notion of substantial
elements, the Sautrantika school of Buddhism adhered to the notion of a
momentary stream of consciousness (citta-samn tdna), and surreptitiously re-
introduced the old Indian notion of a self (atman, pudgala). These are
distinct and subtle theories that Vasubandhu had to deal with. As such, if
Vasubandhu's explanation is going to be any different, he should avoid the
variety of metaphysical theories presented by the Sarvastivadins and the
Sautrantikas. This would be the most important fact to be borne in mind
when evaluating Vasubandhu's explanation of the transformation of con-
sciousness (viyjina-parindma). Any explanation that would involve either
the Sarvastivada or the SautrAntika metaphysics would vitiate Vasuban-
dhu's efforts to restore the original teachings of the Buddha, if that was what
he had in mind when compiling this treatise.
192