1. This is a mere concept, because it reflects a substantially nonexistent object, like the perception of hair and [double] moon on the part of one afflicated with eye-disease. The perception of hair floating in space and the perception of double moon are here considered to be of one who is afflicted with eye-disease. Such illusory perceptions are not uncommon, even though they have no basis in ordinary experience. The possibility of having such illusory perceptions indicates the problems relating to one of our most important sources of knowledge. It is conditioned by various factors, and in this particular case of illusory perception, the dominant factor is the eye-disease. Even if one is not afflicted by such eye-disease, one of the most important factors that determine sensory experience is human disposition. The Buddha, who did not recognize the possibility of omniscience (sarvajiatva), was compelled to assume the relevance of human dispositions in any act of perception. For him, there is no other way in which human beings can deal with the sensory input, the "big, blooming, buzzing confusion." In such a context, to assume that an object can be known without any distortion, that it can be known "as it is", is to claim too much. It is this over-claim of the metaphysical realist that Vasubandhu criticizes as the "non-existent object" (asad-artha). For Vasubandhu, this "non-existent object' is a "mere concept" (vjiiaptimdtramn). To label it as a mere concept is not to say it is absolutely false or imagined. On the contrary, it is an experience that involves one's dispositional tendencies and which is communicated through a concept. If this concept were to be "reified," it would not be a "mere concept," but a concept that would correspond exactly with the object that is independent (vyiqapty antaram artham, see Vasubandhu's comments on Vimri 10 explained below). For this reason, this singularly important term vzfiapti is here rendered as "concept," contrary to the available understanding of it as "ideation" or "consciousness." Vasubandhu, as the author of the Abhidharmakoia, has already utilized this term and its negative form (avyiqaptz) to explain the varieties of karma discussed in Buddhism (see Akb pp. 162, 235-236; also in Ndgarjuna's Kdriki XVII. 4-5). In those contexts, it was used in the sense of "intimation." However, where such "intimation" or "communication" cannot be made, what is available is a pure fabrication, a nirmana. Thus, according to the scholastics as reported by Vasubandhu, any state that is beyond the first stage of meditation (prathama-dhyana) lacks any means of communication (vfiiapti-samua/pdakdbhkva, Akb p. 427; Adv p. 401) and, therefore, is literally indefinable. This is because they believed that after the first stage of meditation all modes of discrimination and, therefore of conceptualization are abandoned. These cannot be spoken of except through fabrications (nirmita, Akb p. 427). Our analysis of the four preliminary states of meditation (see "Analytic Yoga") leaves no room for such ineffability. Therefore, in the present context, when Vasubandhu maintains that truth or reality is a "mere concept," he is not insisting that it is beyond conceptualization or description. On the contrary, he is following the Buddha's own explanation that there are no eternal truths (saccani . . . niccanl) apart from sense experience (afiatra safifiqya, Sn 886) and which are communicated through concepts. As sense experience is dispositionally conditioned and, therefore, liable to change (sabbe sankhkrd anicca, Dh 277) depending upon conditions, the concepts by means of which such experience is communicated could not be incorruptible nor can they represent an object that is completely independent (see William James, Some Problems of Philosophy, pp. 33-34; Principles of Psychology, 11.78-79). A metaphysical realist will undoubtedly be shaken up by a statement like Vasubandhu's. Therefore, he will raise questions that worry him most. In the next verse, Vasubandhu anticipates such questions.

2. If a concept were to be without a real object, neither the determination of space and time, nor the non-determination of the [perceptual] stream nor fruitful activity would be proper. The denial of a "real object" represented by a concept throws the metaphysical realist into a quandry. He cannot account for four events which he has tried to justify on the basis of the existence of such a real object. The first two are space and time. For a philosopher like Immanual Kant, these were transcendental forms of sensation. For him, non-spatial and non-temporal events are not known through sense experience. Whether one can develop a non-sensuous "intutition" on the basis of which such real objects can be known is an open question in Kant. At least for the present moment, Vasubandhu is not ready to deal with that question. The denial of a real object also deprives the metaphysical realist of any means of explaining the problem of verification, for two different individuals would not be able to perceive the same object. Worst of all, such a denial will leave any response to sensory stimuli, any form of uniformity of behavior, without an explanation. Not only a life of morality, but even the ordinary day-to-day life of fruitful activity would be rendered meaningless. The claims of the metaphysical realists like the Sarvastivadins were well known to Vasubandhu, who wrote a treatise like the Abhidharmakoia long before he embarked upon the present venture. Unlike the Vaigesikas, they asserted that even though individual atoms (paramdnu) constituting an object cannot be grasped, the collocation of atoms (paramdnu-samcaya) can be known and that when such harmony of atomic causes of elements (dharmanam) exist, there comes to be the capacity for action (kriya-sdmarthya = krtya-kriyd, see Adv. p. 277).

3. As in dreams, the determination of space, etc., is established. Furthermore, as in the case of departed spirits, the non-determination of the [perceptual] stream is established by the perception of the stream of puss, etc., by all of them. Vasabandhu seems to be least interested in discovering a special intuitive faculty through which a "real object," whether it is eternal or not, could be perceived. Instead of looking for any transcendence, he prefers to deal with the problem of sense experience itself. If the determinations of space and time are possible in dream experience even without the so-called "real object," why it is necessary to posit such an object when one is called upon to explain sense experience? However, the problem of explaining similar perceptions of different individuals is not so easily resolved by utilizing dream experience. Therefore, Vasubandhu resorts to the experience of the "departed spirits" (preta), not with a view to establishing the reality of a "spirit world" existing unseen by the ordinary means of cognition, but with the intention of laying bare the over-claims of the metaphysical realists in asserting a "real object." The Buddha's discourse on 'Pltala" (S 4.206-207), indeed, becomes very relevant here. To the question as to whether there is a real "hell" beneath the ocean where human beings are reborn as a result of leading immoral lives, the Buddha responded by saying that such a "hell" is no more than the "painful feelings" (dukkha vedand) one experiences. Whether it is heaven or hell, it is within this fathom-long conscious body (S 1.62). It is what one makes of one's life. And in that process one is guided by one's sensory experiences that are determined on the basis of one's dispositions. To use the terminology of a pragmatist, it is not a ready-made world; rather one that is "being made" all the time. Thus, it is not impossible for human beings to encounter similar 'hellish" experiences and these require no ultimately real objects. On the contrary, they are produced by a variety of conditions among which the so-called 'real object" may play a much less significant role than even human dispositions.

4. Fruitful activity is comparable to affliction in dreams. Again, all of them are similar to experiences in hell involving the perception of the guardians of hell as well as persecution by them. Fruitful human activity is easily explained through a comparison with dream experience. However, Vasubandhu is keen on continuing his explanation based upon "hellish" experiences, especially because by these means he could explain how such things as fear of punishment serve as useful deterrents against immoral behavior. How the belief in a supreme being as a dispenser ofjustice, even though not acceptable to Vasubandhu, can be the cause of fruitful activity needs no explanation. What is being emphasized by Vasubandhu is the fact that the positing of a 'real object" is not a necessary condition for such activity.

5. The appearance of animals in heaven is not comparable to that of the departed spirits in hell, for [some of them, like the guardians] do not experience suffering produced in that context. Before proceeding to question the "real existence" of even states such as "hell" and the "world of spirits," Vasubandhu seems to be interested in explaining the difference between the guardians of hell and those undergoing suffering in such states. The former, even though living in hell, do not undergo suffering in the same way as others do. This may be a rather insignificant problem to be given such prominence in a rather concise treatist like the Vims'atika. Yet, Vasubandhu's desire to explain this difference reveals that he is as interested in the questions regarding moral responsibility as he is with the problem of epistemology.

6. If it were to be assumed that through their actions the appearance and evolution of beings occur in that context [i.e., in hell], why is it not assumed in the context of consciousness? This represents Vasubandhu's reaction to the moral implications of the atomistic theory of action which he himself espoused as a Sautrantika. During the time he was a Sautrantika, Vasubandhu spared no pains in explaining how seeds of action could produce fruits (phala) in different states of existence (Akb p. 254). However, placing this doctrine of moral retribution in the context of the theory of moments that was popular with the Sautrantikas, Vasubandhu was compelled to devise various ingenious methods to account for the continuity of the momentary stream of personal existence (ibid., p. 250). Having realized the unsatisfactoriness of that explanation which would not solve the metaphysical problem of 'difference," Vasubandhu is here raising the question as to why such fruits could not be considered part of the stream of consciousness without being located in an altogether different sphere. In other words, he is insisting that moral responsibility be explained on the basis of the continuity in a life process (samsdra) explicated in terms of dependence without breaking it up into discrete segments and then looking for 'real objects" in order to account for that continuity. His reference to the evolution of consciousness (vfiiana) is significant, especially in the context in which the "identification" of a personality is considered. While the physical body is a necessary component in such identification, it is not a sufficient condition. He was probably aware that the Buddha himself recognized the importance of conscious life (vijfina) in explaining the process of "re-identification" (satdnusdri vififidnarm, D 3.134). This doctrine of re-identification was an important part of Vasubandhu's explanation of action in his treatise called Karmasiddhiprakarana.

7. The dispositional basis of action is conceived in one context and the fruit in another. For what reason is it [the fruit] not assumed to be in the same place as the seed? rsana, though generally referred to a seed (bzja) is a dispositional tendency (samskara) that dominates one's behavior (karma). Vasubandhu who abandoned the metaphysics of the Sautrantikas is here insisting that dispositions as well as their effects are manifested in a conscious personality whose continuity through space and time is to be explained on the basis of consciousness (vifiana). The Sautrantika metaphysics that emphasized difference involves an explanation that leaves the seed of action in one place and the fruit or consequence in another. He seems to have realized that his former credo was not very different from the view that the Buddha had rejected, namely, external causation (paramrkatamr) of action.

8. Considering the people who are to be disciplined, the existence of spheres such as material form is spoken of for a very specific purpose. It is comparable to the [reference to] beings of spontaneous birth. If it is consciousness itself that reflects spheres such as material form (rupa) and that there are no such objects of perception, then the Buddha could not have spoken of such spheres of existence. Vasubandhu rejects such an argument (akdranam etat), insisting that the Buddha has spoken of these for the benefit of those who are to be disciplined (vineya-jana). However, before leaping in to the conclusion that this refers to the "skillin-means" (upfya-kauialya) on the part of the Buddha who would speak of non-existent events as existent merely for pragmatic purposes, it would be necessary to examine the metaphysical implications of the realist position that militates against any discourse on discipline (vinaya). A metaphysical realist would recognize a persistent object having its own substantial form (svabhava). For him, the perceiving stream of consciousness (vjhana) is a mere passive tabula rasa on which the object leaves its series of disconnected impressions. As such, that stream of consciousness lacks not only any continuity, but also the capacity to change its course on its own initiative. Discipline (vinaya) of a human being makes no sense in such a context. Neither moral action nor moral responsibility can be accounted for satisfactorily. A radical empiricist approach is required to correct this position. Indeed, this is what Vasubandhu is suggesting when he, in his auto-commentary, explains "specific purpose (abhipriya)" as the intention of acknowledging the unbroken continuity (anucchedam) of the stream (sam tati) in the future (ayatyoh- ). In other words, Vasubandhu seems to take the object as an experience on the basis of which the continuity in consciousness is established. The meaning of the word "object" is thus confined to its practical results, not any metaphysical existence apart from experience. The recognition of continuity in consciousness based upon an experience of an object provides for an opportunity for moral progress as well as responsibility. Vasubandhu sees the best illustration of this sort of solution in the Buddha's recognition of "beings of spontaneous birth" (upapaduka-sattva, Pali opap~tika).

9. The sage has described how a concept, reflecting the twofold spheres, proceeds from its own seed. The reference here is to vfiiapti rather than vyfiina. Vfiiapti can mean that by which a certain awareness of consciousness (vyiinna) is communicated; hence a concept. In order to refute the claims of the metaphysical realist, who assumes the object to have its own nature independently of the perceiving consciousness, Vasubandhu insists upon the concept of the twofold spheres, namely, the visual organ and the visible object, as arising from its own seed. This seed, as explained earlier, is none other than the dispositions (vasand) (see Vimi 7). In the verse that follows, Vasubandhu considers this explanation as a way of establishing or penetrating into the nonsubstantiality of the human person (pudgala-nairdtmya). This fact is very VASUBANDHU'S VIJNAPTM1ATRA TASIDDHI significant, for having rejected the realist conception of a self-existent object, Vasubandhu wants to avoid positing consciousness (vjfidna) as an ultimately real entity. In fact, he seems to understand the concept (vz4hiapth), not simply as a projection of consciousness, as a metaphysical idealist would assume, but rather as a product of the twofold spheres that are determined by dispositions (vasana). This, in a way, is not too far removed from the explanation provided by the Buddha. Only the terminology used is different. In the case of the Buddha, however, the causal account of perception and, therefore, of conception was intended to eliminate the belief in a metaphysical self (diman). Vasubandhu, of course, has an additional problem to deal with, namely, the view of the metaphysical realist. Hence, after presenting a way of penetrating into the non-substantiality of the human person, Vasubandhu immediately proceeds to reject the substantialist notions of real elements (dharma).

10. This, indeed, is the way of penetrating into the non-substantiality of a person. However, the discourse on the penetration into the nonsubstantiality of elements is different in elucidating self as being imagined. The manner in which the understanding of the non-substantiality of a person (pudgala-nairatmya) is achieved is explained in the previous verse. That involved the recognition of a concept generated by dispositions without having to deny perceptual activity. The realization of the nonsubstantiality of the elements is to be achieved through considering the self (dtman) in phenomena as a mere imagination (parikalpita). The self (dtman) referred to here is substance (svabhdva) admitted by the foolish people (bdla) (Virnis 6). Vasubandhu's commentary provides ample information regarding the nature of percepts and concepts that he is expounding. Through the establishment of a "mere-concept" (vijriapti-mdtra), Vasubandhu perceives a way of penetrating into the non-substantiality of all things (vzijraptimatravyavasthapanaya sarva-dharmna nam nairatmya-pravesfo bhavati), and not by its annulment (na tad apavad~t). Indeed, what is denied is a concept of an object that stands independent or apart from a concept (vtiiqapty antaram arthah). On the contrary, even while recognizing a plurality of concepts (hence the use of the plural term vfiiapitndm), Vasubandhu admits their meaningfulness (arthavalttva). Thus, Vasubandhu is compelled to look for a "middle standpoint" from which a concept (v~iiaptz) can be understood. The Buddha's statement that "spheres such as material form exists," needs to be salvaged from the metaphysical interpretations, not only of the "soul-theorists" (atma-vidin), but also of the substantialists (svabhava-vadin). The verses that follow are, therefore, devoted to a critical analysis of the realist interpretation of the nature of the object.

11. Atom-wise, an object is neither one nor many. Neither is it a conglomeration of them. For that reason, an atom is not established. Before he became disillusioned with the Sautrantika (and SarvAstivada) treatment of the object of perception, Vasubandhu was involved in an extensive study of the conception of atoms (paramnnu), for that was the very basis of the explanations of perception in these two schools. His Abhidharmakoiabhdsga abounds in speculations regarding the nature of atoms and how they constitute an object (see Ak pp. 32-33). Indeed, the atoms were even considered as the "ultimate reality" (paramdrtha) by some of these schools (Akb p. 334). Vasubandhu's fascination with such speculation at that time may have blinded him to the fact that it was not very different from the philosophical enterprize of the Vaifesikas. Abandoning his Sautrantika leanings, Vasubandhu now realizes the authorship of the theory of atoms. Therefore, in the present treatise he specifically attributes the theory of atoms to the Vaigesikas. In this auto-commentary, Vasubandhu explains the implications of the theory of atoms, as it emerged in the Vaigesika school. According to him, the Vaigesikas believed that spheres like material form (rUpa), which holds one-to-one correspondence with the concepts of material form, represent a unity (eka) in terms of a molecule, i.e., an entity that consists of parts (avayavTru-pa). However, in terms of atoms it is a plurality (aneka). Vasubandhu argues that a whole is not perceived apart from its parts. Even so, a molecule is nowhere perceived independent of its constituents. Similarly, the object is not a unity of atoms or parts. Neither is it a plurality, for the atoms that go to constitute a molecule are also not perceived, either as individual units (pratyeka) or as an aggregate (samhata).

12. Because of the necessity ofjoining with six others, an atom will have six facets. Since the six atoms occupy equal space, even the aggregate would be a mere atom. An atom, by definition, is without parts (niravayavai ca paramanavah, Akb p. 32). If so, how one atom could join with other atoms to produce a molecule, turned out to be a source of controversy among the different teachers of the SarvAstivada and Sautrantika schools (ibid., pp. 32-33). Compared with such varying views, Vasubandhu preferred a theory presented by Vagumitra, who maintained that one atom does not touch another, but that the idea of touching one another represents merely the absence of any space between them (nirantare tu sprsta-samrjnieti, ibid., p. 33). In that context, Vasubandhu was not abandoning the very conception of atoms. He was simply favoring one theory over another. However, in the present context, Vasubandhu is looking for arguments to abandon the whole theory. Vasubandhu's realization that as a Buddhist he could not argue for an empirical foundation of a theory of atoms, as the Vaigesikas did, compelled him to resort to rational arguments to deny its validity. Therefore, he argues: When an atom has to combine with six others from six directions, it has to possess six facets. For one atom cannot occupy the space of another. However, if each atom were to occupy an identical space and, by definition an atom has no magnitude, then the aggregate itself would be a mere atom. In fact, an aggregate would not be perceived if the parts are separate from one another (paraspara-vyatirek~d).

13. When the coalesence of an atom is not possible, whose coalesence will there be at the time of aggregation. By not admitting the absence of parts, the coalescence of an atom is not established. Samghdta refers to the combination or aggregation of atoms, while sarrzyoga implies coalesence. As mentioned earlier, for an atom to aggregate with other atoms, it should possess at least six different facets or sides. This means that it has parts, and such an assertion would go against the very definition of an atom. To avoid this contradiction, the KRsmTra Vaibhasikas insisted that atoms do not aggregate or do not touch one another (na spriarti, Akb p. 32). If the atoms do not touch one another, then there is no way in which they could coalese, for in the case of this latter process, not only would they touch one another with parts, but will have to mingle with another completely (sarvam Vtmana, ibid.). This is impossible if the atoms were to have parts (avayavatva). Thus, aggregation and coalesence involve two anti-nomial processes. Without parts there could be no aggregation. With parts there cannot be coalesence. Yet, in order to coalese, the atoms should come together and they cannot come together because, by definition, they have no parts.

14. The unity of one that possesses spatial distinctions is not proper. [If there were to be no spatial distinctions,] how can there be an enveloping shadow? If an aggregate were to be different [from the atoms], those charcteristics would not be part of it. For Vasubandhu, the conception of unity and plurality are as metaphysical as are the conceptions of atoms and aggregates to which they are applied. In the context of a theory of atoms, unity would imply the absence of any spatial distinctions such as front and back, lighted and shaded segments, etc. If an aggregate were to be different from the atoms, the characteristics that are not part of the atoms could not appear in the aggregate of which they are parts. The conceptions of unity and plurality are, therefore, the same as the metaphysical ideas of identity and difference.

15. When there is unity, there is no progressive movement nor simultaneous perception and non-perception. Neither is there interrupted and diversified activity nor perception of subtle things. The criticism presented here is based upon the assumption that unity is the same as identity perceived in the form of substance (svabhdva). A few centuries earlier, Nagarjuna had amply demonstrated the difficulties involved in explaining movement (gati = eti) and change in the context of a theory of substance. Vasubandhu is here reiterating the same arguments. Candrakirti, who was explaining NAgArjuna's arguments, utilized the example of a 'foot' (carana), considered as an aggregate of atoms (paramanu-samghata), to illustrate the difficulties in explaining movement (MKV p. 93). Furthermore, Vasubandhu argues that the conception of a unitary substance would create problems regarding the perception of an object. No object is perceived in its entirety. Certain parts or facets are perceived and, at the same time, certain other parts remain unperceived. Unity, implying a substance, should make it possible to see all parts by seeing one part. The front and back of an object could be seen at the same time, and this is empirically impossible. The same applies to interrupted and diversified activity. If the perceived object consists of one unitary substance, it would be perceived in an identical form all the time. There cannot be variation in the perception even though that perception may be interrupted due to other circumstances. Finally, any process of discovery will be rendered meaningless, for very often what is claimed to have been discovered is some subtle thing that has escaped one's attention previously. Perception of such subtle differences would not be possible if things continue as identities or substances.

16. Immediate knowledge is as in dream, etc. When that occurs, then that object is not perceived. How, then, can immediacy be conceived. This is an extremely important epistemological observation. There is no doubt that human beings perceive and continue to perceive objects. However, at the time of perception of the object, there certainly is no awareness that one is perceiving that object. When awareness arises that one is perceiving an object, then at that very moment the object is no more perceived. Vasubandhu is here making an extremely subtle epistemological distinction between "perceiving an object" and 'being aware of the perceiving of an object." For him, what is generally understood as immediate perception (pratyakla) is the former, not the latter. Thus, by the time the awareness of perception arises, the object perceived is already in the past and is non-existent. Vasubandhu's analysis of perception represents a veiled rejection of a metaphysical cogito, i.e., one who is conscious of himself before an object is perceived. It is a different way of expressing what Nagajuna intended to say in Chapter III of his Kanrik. In any act of experience, one does not start with the awareness of oneself (svam atmanam dars'anam, Kdrika III.2). Instead, self-consciousness (vtiaina) is what emerges depending upon the sense organ and the object of sense (cakkhuni ca paticca rfipe ca uppajjati cakkhuvifiianam, M 1. 111). This causal account of perception, which can be traced back to the Buddha himself and which is re-stated by Nagarjuna (Kdriki III. 7; MKVp.r 118) is utilized by Vasubandhu who was keen on rejecting the naive realism of the Sarvastivadins that an object that impinges on the senses can be perceived in its "real form" without distortions. Instead of assuming that one can perceive a real object, Vasubandhu is emphasizing the variety of conditions that affects every act of perception. Dream experience (svapna) turns out to be a valuable means by which he could inculcate this idea.

17. As such, a concept is said to reflect that [experience]. Memory arises therefrom. One who is not awakened does not realize the absence of the object of perception in dream. The immediate experience (pratyaksa), discussed in the previous verse, receives further explanation here. There is no denial that such an immediate experience occurs. The question is whether that experience reflects a "real and substantial object" (sad-artha). Vasubandhu's answer seems to be clearly in the negative. What then is that immediate experience? Is it a "big blooming buzzing confusion?" Vasubandhu's auto-commentary seems to confirm that this is the case. With the emergence of memory (smrty utpdat), the experience of the object (arthanubhava) is interrupted and a 'mental concept' (mano-vfitapti) arises, reflecting that experience but mixed up with one's memory. It is this latter that is referred to as the 'thought of material form, etc." (rupadivikalpika). Thus, the object as "conceived" is not identical with the experience, even though it has a basis in experience. This does not mean that Vasubandhu was recognizing a 'pre-cognitive" or "pre-conceptual" reality, which is beyond all forms of discrimination and description. He does not refer to it as vfiiapti-mitra, for vyjfapti is the conceptualized. Such conceptualization involving memory (smrtt) brings in many other elements such as the exercise of thought (vikalpabhygsa) and dispositional tendencies (vdsana). The "sensible muchness" receives its form through such exercise and tendencies. These, however, are not comparable to the eternal and transcendental categories recognized by Kant. They are as changeable and impermanent as the flux of sensible muchness. This is the same as the epistemological position adopted by the Buddha when he explained dispositions (sahkhara) (see section on "The Buddha's Conception of Personhood"). In other words, a "concept" is a substitute for a completed sensory process, no part of which can be arbitrarily picked up and shown to be the "ultimate reality." Without such a concept, no intellectual activity relating to sense experience is at all possible. To awaken to this realization, which is what is implied by prabuddha, does not mean the development of an altogether different "intuition." It is a realization that in any act of cognition, we are involved in conceptualization based upon experience as well as our dispositional tendencies, and that there is no "ultimate reality" or "substance" involved in such experience. This is the radical non-substantialist position of the Buddha.

18. The determination of mutually related concepts is based upon mutual domination. In dream experience, thought is overwhelmed by torpor. Hence the difference in fruit. At this stage, Vasubandhu anticipates an objection from the realist. If the evolution of the individual stream of consciousness (svasamrtna) in terms of dispositional tendencies (vasand) were to dominate the concepts (vijnapti) that are formed on the basis of sense experience (arthapratibhisa), and not the objects themselves (na arthaviiesdt), how can the determination of concepts take place as a result of contact with good or bad friends or the hearing of the true or false doctrines? In other words, our conceptual thinking can be changed by our associations with good or bad people, with true or false ideas. Such changes would be meaningless if concepts were to simply evolve out of our own stream of consciousness, rather than external objects. Vasubandhu's treatment of concepts (vfiiapti) is not different from Ndgarjuna's exposition of convention (samvrti, vyavahara or prajfiapti). For the former, a concept is not a mere linguistic symbol. A concept is also a convention based upon experience as well as dispositions (vOsana). These, therefore, have fruits (phala) on the basis of which their goodness or badness, reality or unreality is determined. The fruits of dream experience are different from the fruits of waking experience, not merely because the former has no external basis and the latter is founded on real external objects, but because of the degree to which the thought process is dominated by torpor or sluggishness. In the waking state, the thought process, being less sluggish, can be dominated by the "concepts" (vfiiapti) of others as well. Hence the human response to varying conventions of the society in which they live, as well as of the societies that they come to associate with. Understanding Vasubandhu's notion of vfiiapti in this manner, one avoids attributing any solipsism to him.

19. Death is a transformation [of the personality] produced by a specific concept of another. It is comparable to the loss of other's memory through being overwhelmed by demonaic thoughts, etc. A metaphyical realist believes that the material body has its own nature (svabhava) and, as such, its termination occurs primarily on the basis of material causes. He assumes that Vasubandhu's philosophy makes death or termination of life (rnarana) meaningless. It is interesting to note that Vasubandhu is not actually denying the phenomenon of death. Instead he is emphasizing an aspect of the life-process (samsara) that the metaphysical realist has completely ignored or cannot explain on the basis of his conception of self-nature. This is the influence of the concepts of others in bringing about a person's death. Conventions of society often bring about the death, not only of criminals, but also of large numbers of innocent people. Hitler's conception of the purity of the Aryan race brought death to millions of Jews. One word from a so-called spiritual leader can cause havoc on the lives of millions of people. Furthermore, for Vasubandhu, who was a faithful Buddhist, death in this life is not the end of the life-process (sarmsdra). It is only a brief interruption, like the interruption of a person's memory through being possessed by demonaic thoughts.

20. How can the devastation of the Dandaka forest resulting from the anger of a sage be established. Or, how can it be established that mental punishment is more blameworthy. Whether the fire that devastated the Dandaka forest was generated by the anger on the part of a sage, or whether he initiated the fire because of his anger is not clear from the above statement. The ability to develop psychokinetic powers (rddhi) is not discounted in Buddhism. Only its value as a means of attaining spiritiual progress is abandoned. The Buddha certainly recognized the overwhelming power of the human mind, either in the perpetuation of evil or the promotion of good. Hence his APPENDIX LI emphasis on the need to cleanse one's thought (citta-paroyodapana). Vasubandhu is utilizing the Buddha's discourse to Upali, a disciple of Mahavira. where the Buddha emphasized the importance attached to mental action (mano-kamma, instead of mano-danda) in his teachings (M 1.371-387). Furthermore, the Buddha's statement: "The world is led by thought" (cittena noyyati loko, S 1.39) would make no sense if the mind were to be given a secondary place in explaining human behavior. He would want to maintain that even the substantialist theories, which can in the long run be destructive of human life as well as institutions, are the results of concepts.

21. The knowledge of those who are telepathic is without a real object. How? It is like the knowledge of one's own thought. It is due to ignorance. Such is the sphere of the enlightened one. The present verse is often taken as evidence for the metaphysical idealism of Vasubandhu, comparable to the Vedantic standpoint where the subject-object discrimination is dissolved in a higher intuition. However, a careful consideration of the terminology used by Vasubandhu may yield an altogether different view. Vasubandhu is not denying telepathic knowledge. He is merely rejecting the view that such knowledge reveals the existence of a real object (yathartha), not a mere object (artha). Yathartha is identical with sad-artha. The problem relates not only to telepathic knowledge, but also to the knowledge of one's own thought. There is no question that thoughts occur in a conscious human being. Vasubandhu has already indicated how the so-called immediate experience vanishes into thin air when reflection occurs (Virni 16). Similarly to assume the thinking process of another (para-citta) is as metaphysically involved as the recognition of a cogito. What remains at the end of both processes is a "mere concept" (vYiiapti-mztra), and this is the sphere of the enlightened one. It is, indeed, the knowledge that all phenomena (dharmah), including one's own personal experience, are non-substantial (anatman).

22. The establishment of a "mere concept" has been achieved by me according to my ability, even though it is unthinkable. It is, indeed, the sphere of the enlightened one. In his commentary, Vasubandhu characterizes the doctrine of "mere concept" (viijptimntra) as one which involves a variety of relative determinations (ananta-viniicaya-prabheda) and immeasurable profundity (agddhagambhirya), thus leaving room for some to assume transcendence of vjfiaptimatrati. However, considering the statement closely, especially in the light of some of the fundamental teachings of the Buddha as well as the manner in which a disciple of the Buddha would pay reverence to the "true doctrine" (sad-dharma), this statement can be explained in a totally different way. The "middle path" (madhyama pratipat), proposed by the Buddha in his discourse to Kaccayana was not one that would yield an absolutistic interpretation. The theory of "dependent arising" (prafftyasamutpada) was, indeed, intended to avoid any notion of an absolute ultimate truth or reality. If Vasubandhu's theory of "mere concept" (vfiqaptimntra) has any affinity to the Buddha's middle way, it could not provide any basis for a "extreme decision or determination" (anta-niicaya). Being fully cognisant of this character of the Buddha's teaching, Vasubandhu is emphasizing not only the relativity (ananta) but also the variety of contexts (prabheda) in which it can be applied. The statement that it is immeasurable in profundity (agadha-gambhriya) can only be properly understood in the context in which Vasubandhu, as a devoted disciple of the Buddha, places himself in relation to the Buddha. The humility with which he treats his own explanation of the Buddha-word and the respect with which he held the Buddha's own insight, is clearly implied in his statements: "It is not possible for one like me to think of it with its manifold implications," (sarva-prakdrd tu sa mddriaisi cintayitumr na iakyate, p. 11). It is the sphere of the enlightened ones (buddhdnam), because it is where the distinction between the knowledge (Ainna) and the known (ftieya) are completely destroyed. What is destroyed is not the discrimination between the subject and object, but rather the relationship between knowlege and the known. In other words, it is a complete rejection of the discrimination that a metaphysical realist or a substantialist would make between knowledge (U0 na) and the object of knowledge (jiieya). It is what Nagarjuna was emphasizing when he wanted to establish the non-substantiality of elements (dharma-nairatmya), namely, the appeasement of the object (drastavyopaiama, Karika V.8). It is not intended as a justification for absolute idealism. Vij iaptimitratksiddhi Tritpzka-vijimpti-koriko
